---
layout: page
title: protein statistics
description: investigating the relation between protein-alignment stats and protein structure or function
img: assets/img/project_icon_protalign.png
redirect: 
github: https://github.com/ttesileanu/multicov
importance: 5
category: past
---

We investigated ways of extracting structural and functional information from
statistical properties of protein alignments. We focused mainly on statistical coupling
analysis (SCA) and direct coupling analysis (DCA). We showed that experimental evidence
for many claims related to SCA is currently lacking, and suggested better ways to test
it. We are also looking at how the global probability model used by DCA relates to
protein function, and whether machine-learning methods applied directly to protein
sequences can better predict fitness.

Proteins are chains of amino acids that fold into complex structures at equilibrium.
Finding the relation between a protein's amino acid sequence and its structure or
function is very important for many applications in biology. However, first-principles
approaches based on fundamental physics have had limited success in understanding this
relation for all but the smallest proteins.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {%- include figure.html path="assets/img/project_protalign_alignment.png" dark_path="assets/img/project_protalign_alignment-dark.png" title="Example protein multi-sequence alignment" class="img-fluid rounded" zoomable=true -%}
    </div>
</div>

An alternative approach, thought of many decades ago but made possible recently by large
sequencing efforts, is to use the variability provided by evolution. By looking at
different organisms, it is possible to find many variants of a protein that have
different sequences but fulfill similar functions and fold in similar ways. These can be
assembled into alignments that highlight the differences between these sequences. How
much can we infer from these alignments?

Although publicly-available alignments have been steadily growing, having upwards of
50,000 sequences for some proteins, these numbers are still minuscule compared to the
space of all possible protein sequences. The question arises whether we can use
statistical methods to infer functional or structural information even for sequences
that have not yet been encountered in nature. This can of course only be done given a
set of assumptions that constrain the problem.

Two main approaches have gained some traction. One of them, statistical coupling
analysis (SCA), posits the existence of subsets of amino acids in proteins called
"sectors". These are contiguous in space in the folded protein, though not in sequence,
and are more conserved evolutionarily than other parts of the protein.

Another approach, direct coupling analysis (DCA), starts from the assumption that
residues that are nearby in the folded structure are more strongly constrained during
evolution, and thus a correlation should be visible between their mutations. A
correction needs to be applied, however, because correlations, unlike spatial contacts,
are transitive. If residues A and B, and residues B and C are close in structure, then
mutations of A, B, and C are all likely to be pairwise correlated, but A and C may not
be in contact. DCA uses inference on a probabilistic model to distinguish the causal
correlations from the ones generated by transitivity. This approach leads to very
accurate predictions of the contacts in a folded protein and, based on this, it is even
able to provide an estimate for the full folded structure.

We have focused on investigating the assumptions behind these two methods. We have shown
that it is useful to distinguish various different meanings of the protein sectors that
have been conflated in the literature up to this point. For example, the property of
being formed by a contiguous set of residues is a structural one, the property of being
more conserved than other residues is an evolutionary one, and the property of having a
distinct functional role is a functional one. While all of these have been assumed to
apply to SCA sectors, there is no a priori reason why they should occur together. In
fact, we showed that most experimental evidence for the functional role of SCA sectors
could be an artifact of the overlap between SCA sectors and conserved residues. We also
suggested new experiments that could clear up the confusion.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {%- include figure.html path="assets/img/project_protalign_table.png" dark_path="assets/img/project_protalign_table-dark.png" title="Table explaining various definitions of protein sectors" class="img-fluid rounded" zoomable=true -%}
    </div>
</div>

For DCA, various groups have proposed that the method can also be used to predict the
fitness effect of mutations. This is because the method provides an estimate of the
probability that any given sequence is part of a protein family. If a mutation leads to
a sequence with a low probability, then we can assume its fitness to be low. However,
each protein is optimized for several different functions, and the DCA probability can
only respond to one of these (or a particular mixture). We are working on using machine
learning techniques to combine alignment information with a small number of fitness
measurements in order to predict the outcome of more general mutations.

<div class="publications">
    <h2>publication</h2>
    {% bibliography -f papers -q @article[keywords ^= protalign] %}
</div>
